---
layout: post
title: Defense of Eratosthenes in Response to Lysias’ Prosecution
category: speech
---

### Greek Oratory II / Professor Habinek

> **Factors to consider**:
> 
> + **I am at my euthenai hearing but am solely responding to Lysias’ prosecution speech** 
> + **It’s 403 B.C.**

I come to you today in a state of great fear.  Understandably, as a result of my affiliations, I will be shunned, hated, and scrutinized by the masses as long as I live.  I now have a new identity, shaped by the perverse actions of my peers and despised by those adversely affected by their actions.  For many who lack understanding, my guilt can be confirmed by my association with the merciless regime alone.  For others, driven by fear, the risk that accompanies acquitting a person associated with unpopular ideas constitutes ample reason for my execution.  To all such people, it does me no good to speak; for they are no different than many of those who served in the last class of rulers who were all too keen on destroying human life that was not their own.  Yet to you, who place your trust not in flighty associations, but in sound logic, and who withhold your convictions until all stories have been heard, to you, it may serve me well to speak.  And for this opportunity, you deserve no less than my sincerest gratitude, respect, and honesty.  These things, I will surely give. 

Please understand that today, I wish not to prove my complete innocence nor to express self-pity to earn your sympathy.  I acknowledge my regret with shame and clarity and recognize that I have done wrongs.  As much as I wish, an emotional appeal would neither diminish these wrongs nor display my genuine disgust at my past affiliations.  Only acts of gratitude displayed over time can accomplish these things.  And so, I will address the issue that stands before me in plain terms.  I admit the brother of my prosecutor, Polemarchus, was arrested with my own hands.  However, I wish to recount the circumstances of this arrest, for they were quite different from those recounted by my prosecutor.

The main area in which my prosecutor errors is by assuming that I was alone and unattended during the arrest.  This was not true.  I was under the scrutiny of and attended by Peison’s most faithful and powerful attendants.  The second area in which he errors is in assuming my motivations were self-driven.  This I must explain in detail.  As in any group of rulers, there are always those who are motivated by bad intentions.  These men, if not challenged, will subjugate those with good intentions under their rule.  In attempt to explain what I mean by this, I will remind you of a true story recounted by our forefathers concerning Phalaris, tyrant of Sicily.  Phalaris was corrupted by an insatiable greed for power.  Deceiving the citizens with acts of good will, he was chosen to ascend the throne as sole ruler.  When the citizens, ignorant of what type of man they had elected, offered Phalaris a bodyguard, the poet Stesichrous astutely related the tale of the horse who once possessed the meadows.  The story goes as follows.  One day, when the horse was not watching, a bumbling stag wrought havoc upon the horse’s land.  The horse, wishing to exact revenge, asked a man for help.  The man agreed under one seemingly insignificant condition.  “So long as you take this bit and let me mount you, I will help you in your pursuit,” said the man.  The horse agreed to these terms, not sensing any indication of foul play.  But the man never helped the horse punish the stag.  Instead, the horse forever became the man’s slave.  Verily I tell you, men like Peison and Theognis enacted their policies using the deceitful ways characteristic of this man.  This I do not have to prove to you.  For example, recall my prosecutor’s account of how Peison took advantage of Lysias’ honesty and tricked him into handing over his fortune.  In similar ways, by showing acts of good will to myself of others, they gained trust and secured for themselves positions of power which became difficult and dreadfully dangerous to challenge over time.  As soon as I became aware of the men I had supported, I fought them as best I could.  As my prosecutor has stated, I protested the actions of The Thirty at the Counsel.  My protesting, however, which—I repeat—derided the unfair treatment of the Athenian citizens, was ineffectual.  The tyrants with the most control had instilled enough fear in their peers that a coup had become too dangerous.  By the time of the arrest, the pressure had amounted to a matter of life and death for me and my immediate supervisors.  Rather than getting me and my supervisors killed by disobeying orders or breaking into houses to arrest many and confiscate private property, I chose to do the least harm by arresting one and confiscating nothing.  I also wish to make it clear that although I did arrest your brother, I neither wished nor ordered him to be killed. 

Gentleman of the jury, I urge you to be careful not to arrive at conclusions stemming from anything but the analysis of facts.  By doing anything else, you would be exhibiting the same tendencies abused by the most unjust tyrants.  Attributing worth to testimonies regarding me having being seen in the presence of leaders such as Critias and Theramenes would resemble these tendencies.  It is obvious that these accounts suggest nothing in the way of my philosophies or desires.  Convicting a man on these speculations alone would be ridiculous.  I think this is plain to see.  My main concern, however, deals with the implications which a guilty verdict would yield upon the health of the city in the future.  Imagine, for instance, the societal destruction that would be caused by convicting someone from simply seeing them with a criminal.  Prison guards could be suspects for the crimes committed by the criminals over whom they preside and witnesses could be suspects for the crimes they witnessed.  But imagine further.  Imagine to what extent people would be judged by simply expressing similar ideas held by suspect citizens, blameless or blameworthy.  Many citizens would be careful to choose with whom they engaged.  Most would resist speaking to others or openly expressing their ideas lest their opinions be held suspect.  This fear of being held suspect by fellow citizens would paralyze society.  With the incentives of free speech compromised, the Assembly and Counsel would lose its usefulness.  In short, democracy would die.  

Now that I’ve defended my view, which I believe to be both just and beneficial for Athens, I wish to shed light on my current situation and frame of mind.  Make it known that I have no intentions of moving to Eleusis.  The option of leaving Athens for Eleusis was presented to me and many of my peers in accordance with the treaty.  There, I would be entitled to self-governance.  There, I could live in a community more sympathetic toward oligarchic rule.  There, I would be safe.  Yet there, I do not wish to be.  “Why,” you may ask yourselves, “why do I not wish to depart?”  The answer is simple.  I would surely choose to depart if, after having lived and operated within oligarchical rule, I retained faith in the system.  However, my faith in that brand of governing is gone, void of all honor and trustworthiness.  In the face of retribution, I’ll admit that I’ve developed a heightened sense of respect for your democracy and have come to prefer it to the deception, terrors, and backstabbing which inevitably accompany oligarchical rule.  And for this reason, I will not attempt to leave the country if I am not acquitted.  I realize that escaping from a democracy means forfeiting the security of the people and things we hold most dear.  Make it known: I wish to stay here.


With that, I rest my case.  In doing so, I hope I have left nothing out.  Yet, if I may, before I sit down, I wish to beg from you several things.  First, do not attempt to forgive me, but to understand me.  Understand that I did what I thought best in circumstances of chaos.  Understand that I was neither motivated by greed nor power but was subjugated against my will through the machinations of those using fear and psychological ploys as their primary incentives.  Second, do not judge with rashness, but with wisdom and equanimity.  For those who have been victims of untellable evil doings or have sacrificed greatly in the name of freedom, it will be easy to reach an emotional verdict.  However, I challenge everyone to do otherwise.  Examine the facts and internalize the consequences of your votes.  I pray you may choose wisely.  For the only crime which I was truly guilty of was being a fool.  
Thank you. 